Docker and Containerization 
Docker is a platform used to run applications inside isolated environments called containers. These containers allow you to run software without worrying 
about differences in operating systems or local machine setups.
Containerization means packaging an application along with all its dependencies, libraries, and configurations into a single unit. This unit can then run 
consistently on any machine that has Docker installed. Without containers, setting up a project often requires manually installing dependencies on each 
system, which can lead to compatibility issues. With Docker, the entire setup is defined once and reused everywhere.
A key advantage is that you can start applications or even complex open-source projects locally without installing anything directly on your machine. 
For example, running a database like MongoDB can be done with a single command instead of a full installation process.

Docker Architecture 
Docker works through three main components.
The Docker Engine is the core system that creates and runs containers. It handles the actual execution and isolation of applications.
The Docker CLI is the interface you use to interact with the engine. Through commands, you can start, stop, build, and inspect containers.
The Docker Registry is where images are stored and shared. Public registries like Docker Hub allow you to pull prebuilt images or push your own.

Images vs Containers 
A Docker image is a lightweight, executable package that contains everything required to run an application, including code, runtime, libraries, 
and dependencies.
A container is a running instance of that image. When you execute an image, it becomes a container that runs in an isolated environment. Multiple 
containers can be created from the same image.

Running Containers and Port Mapping 
When running a container, you often need to map ports so that your local machine can communicate with the application inside the container.

For example:

```bash
docker run -d -p 27017:27017 mongo
```

This maps port `27017` on your machine to port `27017` inside the container. The first port is the host (your system), and the second is the container’s 
internal port.
Port mapping is necessary because containers are isolated and do not expose services to the host by default.

Common Docker Commands 

You interact with Docker using commands such as:
  `docker ps` to view running containers
  `docker images` to list available images
  `docker run` to start a container
  `docker kill <container_id>` to stop a container
  `docker exec` to run commands inside a running container
  `docker build` to create your own image
  `docker push` to upload an image to a registry

 
Dockerfile and Building Images 
A Dockerfile is a configuration file that defines how to build a Docker image. It specifies the base environment, dependencies, and commands needed to 
run your application.
The process typically starts with a base image (for example, a Node.js environment). You then define a working directory inside the container and copy 
your project files into it. Some files, such as local dependencies or unnecessary folders, should not be copied. These are excluded using a `.dockerignore` 
file.
After copying the code, dependencies are installed inside the container using commands like `npm install`. You then expose the port your application 
runs on and define a command that starts the application when the container runs. Only one main command is defined for execution when the container starts,
while other instructions are executed during the build phase.

Once the Dockerfile is ready, you build the image using:

```bash
docker build -t image_name .
```

Pushing Images to a Registry 
To share your image, you push it to a registry like Docker Hub.

The process involves creating a repository on Docker Hub, logging in through the Docker CLI, and generating an access token for authentication. After tagging your image appropriately, you push it using:

```bash
docker push username/repository:tag
```

This allows others (or your deployment systems) to pull and run your image anywhere.

Kubernetes and Container Orchestration 
While Docker handles individual containers, orchestration tools like Kubernetes manage multiple containers across systems.
Kubernetes helps in deploying, scaling, and managing containerized applications automatically. It ensures containers are running, restarts them if they 
fail, distributes load, and manages clusters of machines efficiently.

Overall Perspective 
Docker simplifies development and deployment by making environments consistent. Instead of worrying about system differences or manual setup,
you define everything once in a Dockerfile and run it anywhere. When applications grow and require multiple containers across machines, orchestration 
tools like Kubernetes take over to manage them at scale.
