Docker Layers (How Images Are Built)
Docker images are built in layers, where each instruction in a Dockerfile 
creates a new layer on top of the previous one. You can think of it like
stacking changes, where every step modifies the filesystem incrementally.

The process begins with a base layer:

FROM node

This acts as the foundation, similar to an operating system or runtime 
environment.

Each subsequent instruction creates its own layer. For example:

WORKDIR /app sets the working directory
COPY adds files into the container
RUN npm install installs dependencies
EXPOSE 3000 documents which port the app uses
CMD ["node", "index.js"] defines the process to run when the container starts

All of these together form the final image.

Why Layers Matter
Layers make Docker efficient and scalable.
They are reusable and cached. If multiple images use the same base image or 
share common steps, Docker reuses those layers instead of rebuilding them. 
This reduces build time and storage usage.

They are immutable. Once a layer is created, it cannot be modified. 
If anything changes, Docker creates a new layer rather than editing the old 
one. This ensures consistency and allows different images to share 
unchanged layers safely.

They also enable smart caching. When you rebuild an image, Docker checks 
each step. If nothing has changed in a step, it uses the cached version. 
If a change occurs (for example, in your source code), only that step and 
the ones after it are rebuilt.

Optimizing Docker Builds
A common mistake is copying all source code before installing dependencies. 
This breaks caching because any small code change forces npm install to run 
again.

An optimized approach is:

FROM node
WORKDIR /app

COPY package.json package-lock.json ./
RUN npm install

COPY . .

EXPOSE 3000
CMD ["node", "index.js"]

Here, dependencies are installed before copying the full source code. 
Since dependency files change less frequently, Docker can cache the 
expensive npm install step and reuse it across builds.

Volumes (Data Persistence)
Containers are designed to be stateless, meaning their data is lost when 
they stop or are removed. However, some applications like databases need 
persistent storage.

Docker volumes solve this by storing data outside the container’s lifecycle.
You can create a volume:

docker volume create mongo_db_data
Then mount it when running a container:

docker run -p 27017:27017 -v mongo_db_data:/data/db mongo

Here, /data/db inside the container is mapped to a persistent volume. 
Even if the container is deleted, the data remains as long as the volume 
exists.

Docker Networking (Container Communication)
By default, containers are isolated. To allow multiple containers (like a 
backend and a database) to communicate, they must be connected through a 
Docker network.

The typical workflow is:

Build your application image
Create a network
Start containers attached to that network

Example:

docker network create my_network

Run backend:

docker run --network my_network backend_image

Run database:

docker run --network my_network mongo

Both containers can now communicate using container names as hostnames.

End-to-End Flow
In a real setup, you build your application image, optimize it using 
layered caching, attach persistent storage using volumes if needed, and 
connect multiple containers using networks. This allows you to run complete 
systems (like backend + database) in isolated yet connected environments.
