Localhost
Localhost refers to the computer you are currently working on. It uses a loopback address (typically 127.0.0.1) that allows the machine to communicate with itself over a network interface. It can also be accessed using the domain name localhost.

A key detail is that localhost always refers to the current machine. If another device tries to access localhost, it will point to itself, not your system. To access your server from another device, your private IP address must be used instead.

Ping and Domain Resolution
The ping command is used to check connectivity between your system and a domain. It also resolves the domain name to its corresponding IP address.
If ping works, it confirms:

DNS resolution is functioning
Basic network connectivity exists

If a website still fails to load in a browser despite a successful ping, the issue is likely at a higher level, such as HTTP/HTTPS, firewall restrictions, or TLS configuration—not general internet connectivity.

IP Address (IPv4)
An IPv4 address consists of four octets separated by dots, where each octet ranges from 0 to 255 (e.g., 192.168.1.1). It uniquely identifies a device on a network.

Local Network and Private IPs
Devices connected to the same router (e.g., multiple laptops on the same Wi-Fi network) can communicate using private IP addresses (e.g., 192.168.x.x).

If a service is running on one device, another device must use:
http://<private-ip>:<port>

Using localhost will fail because it refers to the requesting device, not the host machine.

Network Configuration (ifconfig)
The ifconfig command displays network interfaces:

lo0: Loopback interface (127.0.0.1), used only for internal communication
en0: Network interface (Wi-Fi/Ethernet), showing the device’s private IP

For external access within a local network, the en0 address is the relevant one.

Serving Files on a Port
Running a local server binds a process to a specific port (e.g., localhost:3000).

For the service to be accessible by other devices:
It must be bound to 0.0.0.0 or the private IP (not just 127.0.0.1)
The port must be open and listening

If these conditions are met, the service becomes discoverable on the network. Tools like port scanners can detect open ports, which is why unsecured services can be exposed unintentionally.

DNS Manipulation and Phishing Risk
When accessing a website, your system resolves the domain name to an IP address using DNS.
If this mapping is overridden locally (e.g., via the hosts file), the domain can be redirected. For example:

instagram.com → 127.0.0.1

This forces the request to go to your own machine instead of the real server. If a fake service is running locally, it can mimic the original site and capture credentials, making this a common phishing technique.

Self-Hosting vs Cloud Hosting
Self-hosting involves running services on your own hardware. This provides full control but introduces risks:

Downtime if your machine shuts down
Inaccessibility if your internet connection fails

Cloud hosting platforms like Amazon Web Services provide:
High availability
Reliable networking
Redundant infrastructure

This significantly improves uptime and accessibility compared to local hosting.

Virtual Machines (VMs)
A virtual machine is a software-based emulation of a physical computer. A hypervisor sits between the hardware and VMs, allocating CPU, memory, and storage.

Execution path:
Application → Guest OS → Hypervisor → Hardware

Because resources are virtualized and shared, there is added latency and resource mediation.

Bare Metal Servers
A bare metal server is a physical machine dedicated to a single user. It does not use a hypervisor.

Execution path:
Application → OS → Hardware

This results in:
Direct hardware access
No virtualization overhead
Better performance under heavy workloads

Unlike VMs, resources are not shared or dynamically reallocated, but performance is more predictable and efficient.

SSH (Secure Shell) Protocol
SSH is a cryptographic protocol used to securely connect to remote systems. It enables remote command execution and secure file transfer.

Key features:
Encryption: Protects data in transit
Authentication: Supports password and key-based login
Integrity: Ensures data is not tampered with
SSH Key-Based Authentication

In public key authentication:
A key pair (public and private) is generated
The public key is stored on the server in ~/.ssh/authorized_keys
The private key remains on the client

When connecting:
The client initiates a request
The server checks for the client’s public key
The server sends a challenge
The client signs it using the private key
The server verifies the signature using the public key

If verified, access is granted without a password.

SSH File Permissions
Private keys must be securely restricted. If permissions are too open (e.g., 777), SSH rejects the key because it could be accessed by other users.

Secure permissions:
chmod 600 filename.pem

This ensures only the owner can read or modify the key, preserving its confidentiality.
